A Bouquet of Uḍumbara Flowers: An Explanation of the Tenth Day

by Gönpo Tseten Rinpoche

Namo guru-padmākarāya

Magical Display of the wisdom of the victors throughout the three times,Excellently born in
the heart of a new-sprung lotus within the Sindhu ocean,Only guide for beings throughout the
three realms,Lake-Born Vajra of Uḍḍiyāna—From the depths of my heart, I pay homage to you!


In order to give a concise explanation of the Tenth Day, I shall present:

A concise life-story and presentation of the excellent qualities of the Second Buddha of UḍḍiyānaAn
introduction to the great festival, the Tenth DayAn explanation of the gaṇacakraA
teaching on the excellent benefits of offering the gaṇacakra

1. Concise Life-Story and Presentation of the Excellent Qualities of the Second Buddha of Uḍḍiyāna

The great sovereign amongst the victors of the three times, the glorious Uḍḍiyāna, is indivisible
from the primordially free Samantabhadra, the naturally-arisen, primordial dharmakāya.
From the all-encompassing space of the dharmakāya, spontaneously accomplished, he becomes
the saṃbhogakāya of the five perfections. As its natural expression, he arises, defying
imagination, as a completely liberated nirmāṇakāya. He manifests as the Guru in infinite
forms, in infinite buddhafields, in order to guide beings in inconceivable and inexpressible
ways. Thus he is the single embodiment of the sphere of activity of all the buddhas. In
our particular buddhafield, he became renowned as the unrivalled great master Padmākara,
the Lotus-Born. His arrival was foretold in both sūtra and tantra, by the completely perfect
buddhas.

As stated in the Sūtra of Predictions in Magadha:[1]

Within the Milk Grove at Kuśinagara, just before entering nirvāṇa, the completely perfect Buddha
Śākyamuni demonstrated the impermanence of everything—world and beings, outer and inner.
As the Sage gave prophecies about his passing, many of the śrāvakas wept and fainted.
When they regained consciousness, they wept again and cried out in pain to the Blessed One:
“Kyema Kyehü! Protector of the world, if you do not remain, then who will save us from this
darkness?” The Blessed One sighed before the assembly. Then, with a caring smile, the
sage spoke:“Kyeho! Twelve years[2] after I pass into nirvāṇa,On the northwestern border of
the land of Uḍḍiyāna,Within the immaculate waters of Kośa Island,There, upon the heart of
a lotus flowerA person will appear, superior to me.His name will be Padmākara, the Lotus-Born.He
will arise as the Lord of Teachings of sūtra and tantra.Thus, do not weep!Like a supreme
panacea among medicines,With infinite powers the Lotus-Born will come.Thus, do not
grieve!Like the sun and the moon among stars,With infinite powers the Lotus-Born will come.Thus,
do not despair!Like the wish-fulfilling gem among jewels,With infinite powers the Lotus-Born
will come.Thus, why be sad?The darkness of the world will be dispelled!” When he
had spoken thus, the whole assembly rejoiced and reflecting upon his words soothed their
pain. However, the Blessed One knew that doubts could still arise about the arrival of this
superior being. Thus, he spoke again:“Surpassing entirely all the victors of the three times,
this exalted, noble, and marvellous being will excellently take birth, unstained by
a womb, in a naturally-arisen body. Thus, through his mode of birth he will be an exalted
being. Unaffected by old age and decay, a guide to all those who need to be tamed, thus he
will be a noble one. He will be unaffected by death or by the extremes of saṃsāra. Thus his
longevity will be unexcelled. Defeating the māras, he will prevail, completely victorious
over the māras. Thus he will be unexcelled. Without having to traverse or train in the
path, without ever having to take another birth again, he will—in one body and a single lifetime—delight
in the very heart of the Dharma, the vehicle of all the buddhas. Thus he will
be unexcelled. Therefore, if you were to ask, I would tell you that this being will be
none other than the Blessed Protector himself, the teacher of unchanging light, Amitāyus in
actuality.”

The Tantra of the Assembly of Herukas[3] states:

Emaho! From the heart of a lotus—The embodiment of enlightened body, speech and mindThe strength
and majesty of resplendent qualities and activities—Evoked by the gods, this I will manifestAs
crown prince of the victors, the jewel of Uḍḍiyāna.

And The Tantra of the Perfect Embodiment of the Unexcelled Nature,[4] says:

Ten years and two[5] after I pass into nirvāṇa,The Supreme Victor in all worlds,Whose name will
be Padmākara,Will take birth in Uḍḍiyāna upon a blossoming lotusAnd teach Secret Mantra.
This is my prophecy!

The Magical Net of Mañjuśrī,[6] states:

The Glorious Lotus Born Buddha isThe treasure of all-knowing wisdom,The holder of the manifold
Magical Net, the king of tantras,The greatest vidyādhara amongst all buddhas.

Thus was it clearly foretold in both sūtra and tantra. The protector Amitābha—Buddha of Boundless
Light—single embodiment of the compassion, power and blessing of all the victors, sent
forth from his heart a golden vajra, marked with the syllable hrīḥ, which descended onto
a blossoming lotus in the immaculate sparkling waters of an ocean in the north-west of Uḍḍiyāna.
It transformed into an exquisitely beautiful eight-year-old boy, adorned with all
the major and minor marks of perfection, and holding a vajra and lotus. There he remained,
teaching the profound Dharma to the gods and ḍākinīs of the island.

It so happened that Uḍḍiyāna’s King Indrabhodhi[7] was out on the ocean at the time. He had
no royal heir and his treasuries were empty – thanks to his immense generosity to the poor
and his devotion to the Three Jewels. He had set out with a search-party on a voyage to find
a wish-fulfilling jewel on an isle within the ocean. As they returned with the jewel,
they spotted the miraculous child – first the dharma minister Triguṇadhara[8] and later King
Indrabodhi himself. Taking the child back to the palace, Indrabodhi installed him as the
crown prince and asked to take his seat upon a precious throne. He was known then as Pemajungné
or Padmākara, ‘The Lotus-Born’—as well as Tsokyé Dorjé, ‘Lake Born Vajra’. In due
course he married the queen Prabhāvatī[9] and ruled the kingdom of Uḍḍiyāna according to
the Dharma, thus bringing its citizens to maturity and liberation.

Skilfully, he escaped the affairs of government and went to practice yogic discipline in the
eight great charnel grounds, such as Śītavana in the south. Thus he became known as Śāntarakṣita,
‘Preserver of Peace', bringing the ḍākinīs of the charnel grounds under his sway.
He received empowerments and blessings from the wisdom ḍākinīs—among them, Vajravārāhī—and
in each of the eight charnel grounds he accomplished one of the maṇḍalas pertaining to the
great sādhanas of the Eight Entrustments.[10] Each time the Lotus-Born gained the signs
of accomplishment, the deities and the master’s mind became inseparably united.

Then the Lotus-Born travelled to eastern India, where in the red rock cave at Garuḍa Grove he
met the great master Prabhahasti, from whom he perfectly received all the tantric teachings.
He experienced pure visions of the deities of the vajradhātu-maṇḍala,[11] and displayed
the signs of accomplishment. Thus he became known as Śākya Sengé, ‘Lion of the Śākyas’.


Although already a great lord who had accomplished the definitive meaning, he nonetheless appeared
in a way that enables us to understand him. The Lotus-Born sought out many accomplished
siddhas, travelling to all the great sacred sites of India, and receiving the Mahā-,
Anu- and Ati-yoga teachings. Moreover, displaying the resolution of all doubts concerning
the causal vehicle of characteristics,[12] he became known as the scholar Loden Choksé, ‘Wise
Seeker of the Sublime’.

Travelling to Zahor, the Lotus-Born took the royal princess Mandāravā as his consort for sādhana
practice. Together they went to the Māratika cave, where they practiced the sādhana of
longevity. The Protector of Boundless Life, Amitāyus, appeared, empowered, and blessed them.
Thus their bodies were transformed into vajra-bodies beyond all birth, old age, and death.
Knowing that the time had come to tame the kingdom of Zahor, they returned, and through
many marvellous miracles skilfully tamed its citizens, who had no knowledge of what to
adopt and abandon. Thus the entire kingdom was established in the sacred Dharma, and he was
known as Padmasambhava, ‘Lotus-Born’.

Returning to Uḍḍiyāna, they were captured by evil minsters and burned on a pyre. The master
turned the pyre into a lake to the astonishment of the crowd, and was found unperturbed and
radiant, seated on a lotus. Thus he brought Indrabhodi and the entire kingdom of Uḍḍiyāna
onto the excellent path of liberation and became known as Pema Gyalpo, ‘Lotus King’.

Taking his seat among the naturally arisen stūpas at Lhundrup Tsek – the spontaneous mound –
and at the other charnel grounds, he bound the ḍākinīs and dharmpālas as his servants. Taking
their heart and life-force, he established them as guardians of the teachings. Thus he
became known as Nyima Özer, ‘Rays of the Sun’.

Other stories tell that at one point he drank five hundred measures of beer and was asked to
settle his debt before sunset. Since he was unable to pay, he transfixed the sun in the sky,
so it did not set for seven days. Padmākara displayed countless miracles of this sort,
totally defying the imagination. Abiding as a heruka in this way, he earned renown as Nyima
Özer, ‘Rays of the Sun’, or Nyima Dzin, ‘Seizer of the Sun’.

At the Vajra Throne in Bodh Gaya, the Lotus-Born challenged five hundred evil heretics, defeating
them in debate with logic and magic. When they cast evil spells against him, he reversed
their magic with the aid of a wrathful mantra given to him by the ḍākinī Mārajitā. Thus
he liberated the heretics and burned their city to the ground. Any who remained were taken
under his care and established on the Buddhist path. Thus he became known as Sengé Dradok,
‘Lion’s Roar’.

Moreover, the Lotus-Born journeyed through all of India—the Vajra throne in the centre, the
eight cardinal and intermediate directions, and all its various lands, great and small. Everywhere,
the Lotus-Born tamed beings through the four enlightened activities, establishing
the Dharma and thus immeasurably benefiting beings.

Travelling to Nepal, the Lotus-Born took the Newar Śākyadevī as his consort. Together they entered
retreat and practiced Śrī Heruka, Essence of Great Bliss, at Yangleshö in Nepal. They
experienced visions of the nine deities of the Śrī Heruka maṇḍala and gained each and every
siddhi without exception.

Now follows the story of how the Lotus-Born came to the snowy land of Tibet. The Dharma king
Trisong Detsen had invited the great scholar Śāntarakṣita[13] to build a temple as a support
for practice. This antagonised the evil spirits of the land, who embarked on a campaign
of disaster, preventing the construction of the temple. Śāntarakṣita spoke to the king,
urging him to seek help:

“At the Vajra Throne in India resides a heart-emanation of Amitābha, the Buddha of Boundless
Light. Miraculously born, free from birth and death, he simultaneously knows past, present
and future. He is renowned as the Lotus-Born, the great master from Uḍḍiyāna who makes spirits
and demons his servants. If you invite him to come, he will be able to accomplish all
your plans.”

At this, the king dispatched messengers laden with gold—both bricks and dust—to invite the Lotus-Born.
Clairvoyant, the master knew when the messengers had left. From India he travelled
by miraculous means to the cave of Yari Gong[14] in Mangyul, where he awaited their arrival.
Despite already knowing the answer, when they arrived he asked them, “Where are you
going?”

The messengers replied, “We were sent by the King of Tibet with the words ‘Go to India’, to
invite the great master Padmākara, the Lotus-Born.”

The master stood before them, without his feet touching the ground, and he said, “I am the one!”
This inspired great faith in them all, and gratefully they prostrated to the Lotus-Born,
making circumambulations and offering the gold bricks and dust. The master responded thus,
“For me, all appearances are gold!” He threw the gold back in the direction of Ngari,
and the messengers were bereft.

“No need to feel sad! If you need gold, pick up some sand!”

The messengers picked up some sand and instantly, to their amazement, the master transformed
it into gold.

“Since your Tibetan King and I share a connection through previous aspirations, I will come
to Tibet.”

As they made their way to the dark land of Tibet, they were received by the ‘layman’ Dorje Lekpa,
most powerful of all the gods and demons of the land, together with his retinue of 360
siblings and attendants. They offered respect to the Lotus-Born and swore their allegiance.
As the Lotus-Born reached Palthang, the twelve Tenma goddesses started creating obstacles,
sending down a volley of twelve meteoric lightning bolts. Spinning the ladies overhead
with the threatening mudrā, he turned them as black as twelve lumps of charcoal. The most
powerful of them fled and the remaining eleven were terrified, offering their hearts and
life-force, and swearing their allegiance. When the master reached Oyuk Rong, the last of
the goddesses squeezed herself in between two mountains to the left and right, but the master
quickly came upon her from above. Frightened, she fled to Namtso Lake in the north.
The master flung his vajra into the lake, striking one of her eyes. The lake began to boil,
flaying the flesh off her bones.

“Successor of the Buddha, Dorjé Tötreng Tsel—Mighty Powerful Vajra! Stop this obstruction! Please
let me go! I will heed your every command and be your servant!”

Touching her head to the Lotus-Born’s feet, she offered her life-force. The master bound her
under oath and named her Gangkar Shamé Dorjé Yüdrönma, ‘Fleshless Turquoise Lamp of the White
Glacier’.

Next, the master went to the Thangla foothills, where Nechen Thangla greeted him with obstacles
of rock-like hail[15] and meteoric lightning. Padmākara shot fire from his threatening
mudrā, melting the peak of Thangla with its heat. Terrified, Thangla transformed into a child
with turquoise locks. He and all his retinue of gods and spirits offered their life-force,
becoming guardians of the teachings. In this way the Lotus-Born, using fiercest mudrās,
overpowered and subjugated each and every spirit, from the most powerful to the lowest
amongst the entire eight classes of gods and demons. Thus he became known as Dorje Drolö,
‘Mighty Vajra Wrath’.

On the tenth day of the tenth lunar month, the Lotus-Born finally appeared in physical form
within the heart of Tibet. There he was received by the king, the ministers, and subjects
with various offerings and music. This is how they invited him to Drakmar Drinzang.[16] When
the king failed to offer him respect, the Lotus-Born manifested fire from his hand, singeing
the royal robes. Immediately the king recognized his mistake and offered homage to the
master. The Lotus-Born proceeded to the top of Mount Hepori, where he performed a vajra
dance and restrained all Tibet’s malevolent gods and spirits beneath his command. Thus Glorious
Samyé, the inconceivable, unchanging, spontaneously accomplished temple, was built
as a clear representation of our own world-system, with Mount Meru in the centre, then the
four continents, the subcontinents, the sun and moon, and everything encircled by an outer
perimeter, a ring of iron mountains. Samyé became renowned throughout the three worlds,
the main object of worship for gods, humans, and nāgas.[17] More than one hundred temples
were built there. Through various magical emanations, the great master then performed the
consecration (rabné) ceremony. For this, the deities of the main shrine, ground-floor, and
surrounding temples gathered outside, whereas the deities of the middle and upper floors
came down into the main shrine and the deities of the wall-paintings were seen vividly outside.
The central deities of great awakening were seen to smile, emitting light rays, and
fire shot forth from the curtains covering the wrathful gatekeepers, clearly seen by all.
The Hayagrīva statue from the Ārya Pālo Temple neighed three times, heard by all. Like this,
inconceivable and marvellous miracles occurred.

Within the secluded Chimpu Cave of glorious Samyé, the Lotus-Born transmitted teachings to his
principal disciples—the sovereign king, his heir(s), and Karchen Yeshé Tsogyal. He gave
them the teachings of Mahā-, Anu- and Ati-yoga, as well as countless other profound and uncommon
teachings. As his disciples, the Lotus-Born took the twenty-five accomplished disciples,
the nine heart disciples, translators such as Vairocana, vidyādharas such as Dorjé
Düdjom, the first ordained monks, such as Kön Lu’i Wangpo, and countless numbers of other
fortunate disciples, such as the ḍākinīs who accomplished rainbow-body. Thus with immeasurable
kindness the Lotus-Born turned the wheel of the Dharma of the unsurpassed secret.

For the benefit of beings in degenerate future times, the Lotus-Born hid profound pith-instructions
in the form of treasures (terma) within the mountains, caves and lakes of Tibet. So
that future generations might gain faith and trust, the Lotus-Born left a body-imprint (kurjé)
in a cliff of stacked vajras in Bumthang;[18] he left footprints in places such as
Drakmar in Paro; and he left handprints at the four great lakes—Namtso Chukmo and the others.
These hand and footprints left by the Guru remain visible to the present day – testimony
to his many inconceivable and marvellous deeds. Miraculously, there was nowhere in Tibet
that he did not go – not even a single palm-sized scrap of land was left untrod. Thus he
established places of accomplishment everywhere, to bestow great blessings on whoever might
encounter them.

With manifestations beyond number, based on the capacity and inclination of beings, the Lotus-Born
with his limitless deeds brought inconceivable benefit to beings in places such as
Kashmir, China, Mongolia and Shangshung. In inconceivable ways he brought benefit to fortunate
disciples, both those with physical form and those without, thereby pervading every dwelling
place of gods, humans and nāgas, as many as the grains of sand on this great earth.
The Secret Key Instructions for Accomplishing the Guru[19] states:

As far as space itself extends,Living beings there are found;As far as karma and defilements
last,So too do my activities reach.

The Lotus-Born remained in Tibet for one hundred and eleven years. Then the master departed
to vanquish the land of the rakṣasas. So that the king, ministers and subjects would not object
to his departure, the Lotus-Born bestowed his last testament and oral instructions to
all his Tibetan disciples. He gave his vajra-promise that he would come every morning and
evening to those with faith, and that on every tenth day of the waxing moon he would come
to protect and guard the people of Tibet.

On the tenth day of the tenth lunar month, from the Gungthang Pass, amidst an inconceivable,
enchanting, miraculous display, the Lotus-Born took his leave astride the supreme steed—his
destination the southwest, to subdue the rakṣasas there. Gods and goddesses assembled in
the sky, making boundless offerings and playing a multitude of music. Flowers rained from
the sky and rainbows appeared.

There in the land of the rakṣasas the Lotus-Born remains, assuming a special form in order to
tame the beings there. He ceaselessly leads them to the Dharma by continuously turning the
Dharma wheel, in manifold magical emanations that arouse the good at the heart of all beings.


It is clear that the Guru actually appeared, and thus it is impossible to deny his inconceivable,
exalted deeds—he, whose kindness will always pervade the three realms.

This was an extremely concise account of the precious Guru’s life and liberation. To read a
more extensive account, please consult the Guru’s biographies as recounted in the Pema Kathang[20]
and other texts.

2. Introduction to the Great Festival, the Tenth Day

In general the Tibetans have various traditions for determining the beginning of the year. It
is a well-accepted tradition to start the year with Māgha,[21] or the first lunar month.
Nevertheless, according to the Kālacakra traditions, the year begins with Caitra, or the
third lunar month, and according to tantras such as The Four Vajra-Chapters, The Conduct of
the Yoginīs, The Ocean of Ḍākinīs of the Cakrasaṃvara, The Vajra Palace,[22] and many others,
the year begins with Pauṣa, or the twelfth lunar month. In former times in Tibet, they
used to celebrate New Year during Pauṣa, or the twelfth lunar month. From as early as then,
the tradition of determining the tenth day of the waxing and waning moon has been impartially
accepted by one and all. In the tantras of the Vajrayāna, the tenth day of the waxing
moon each month and the tenth day of the waning moon (or the twenty-fifth day) are explained
to be special days. It was specifically on the tenth day of the waxing moon that the
second Buddha of Uḍḍiyāna displayed his vast and marvellous miraculous deeds of enlightened
body, speech, mind, qualities and activities—throughout the entire world and particularly
in India and Tibet. Likewise, in his great love for us all, the Lotus-Born promised that
it would be primarily on the tenth day of the waxing moon that the blessings of his exalted
compassion would descend on the people of Tibet’s snowy land, as well as on all of us
faithful disciples in need of his taming hand.

The Oral Instruction on the Secret Gathering of Secrets[23] states:

Upon that day of days, the tenth day of the monkey month,And each tenth day of every month,Sending
emanations, I shall fill the world,Supreme and common siddhis richly to bestow.If you
spend your life accomplishing the Teacher,When the time of dissolution comes,You’ll melt
into my heart—Uḍḍiyāna.

The Sampa Lhundrupma—‘The Prayer to Guru Rinpoche that Spontaneously Fulfils all Wishes’[24]
states:

Now, when this degenerate dark age reaches its final depths,At dawn and dusk you come, for those
who have devotion,Riding on the rays of the rising and setting sun—And on the tenth day
of the waxing moon you come in person.

It says in the terma treasures of Ratna Lingpa:[25]

Although I have gone to the land of the rakṣasas—In each monkey year, on the tenth of the monkey
month,And on every tenth day, in each and every monthI will come back personally—this
is a promise.The Lotus-Born does not deceive other beings,So be rid of your doubts, my followers.


A promise made with the Lotus-Born’s vajra-speech can never be deceiving. In The Guide to Accomplishing
the Guru:[26]

On the tenth day of the monkey month, in the monkey year,I of Uḍḍiyāna will appear throughout
Tibet—Of this be sure—it is my pledge and promise.On every tenth day of the month I’ll come,And
with my emanations fill Tibet.This is my sacred pledge.The Lotus-Born does not have
the power to deceive.Fix your minds on me, all you who have devotion.Make a torma like a
blazing jewel, adorn it with an incense stick,And call to me with music and the skull-drum’s
sound.Recite the prayer of seven lines, invoking me with fervent melody.And from the hill
of Cāmara, I of Uḍḍiyāna—Like a mother helpless to resistThe weeping of her darling child—Will
come, my blessings to bestow.This is my pledge, and hell awaits me should I fail.

The Lotus-Born made many undeceiving vajra-promises such as these. Since this was the manner
of our precious Guru’s birth—in the wood-monkey year, on the tenth day of the monkey month,
miraculously as a nirmāṇakāya endowed with the 32 major and 80 minor marks on an isle in
the Sindhu ocean, upon the anthers of a blossoming lotus—the tenth day is an especially
powerful time. It is said that if you make a vast feast-offering on that day, the merit that
you will accumulate is a hundred thousand times more exalted than on any other day. Learned
scholars have variously explained this monkey month to be the fifth, sixth or seventh
month of the Tibetan year. However, it is the mind of the childish that seeks to disagree
upon exactly when it was that the enlightened buddha activity of taming beings actually entered
our world. There is actually no conflict in choosing any of the dates. The great awareness-holder
Jikmé Lingpa said:

In the sixth month, at sunrise on the tenth day,He will appear from the lotus flower blossoming
on Dhanakośa.

Thus, Jikmé Lingpa has identified the monkey month as the sixth Tibetan month. Nevertheless,
there is no fault in choosing any of the other dates. The Cakrasaṃvara root tantra states:[27]


In particular, on the tenth day of the waxing moon and the tenth day of the waning moon (the
twenty-fifth day), yoginīs will come. Thus recognize this time as special and exalted. At
these times, ḍākinīs will come to the outer sacred places, lands and charnel grounds. Internally,
within the vajra-body, the nāḍi, prāṇa and bindu will gather, known as the ‘subsidiary
gathering’. This time is praised as supreme, when interdependent outer and inner circumstances
for accomplishment come together – for the infinite activities of pacifying, increasing,
magnetising and subjugating.

Lochen Dharmaśrī said:

On the tenth day of the waning moon (the twenty-fifth day), the ḍākinīs will gather in the outer
sacred sites, and internally the nāḍi, prāṇa and bindu will gather. Thus this time is
exalted. Particularly during the day on the tenth and at night on the twenty-fifth, accomplished
ḍākinīs will gather in the places of practitioners. Therefore, whenever you begin
an activity, strive to begin it on these days!

The omniscient Longchen Rabjam said:[28]

On the tenth of the waxing moon and the tenth of the waning moon, during the day and at night,
strive in approach and accomplishment; offer the gaṇacakra, fulfilment and confession.

Ngawang Rinchen said in his testament explaining the history of the northern treasures:[29]


Followers of my teachings—If you wish for peace and happiness to come to Tibet—At sunrise on
the tenth day of the waxing moonAn emanation of myself, Uḍḍiyāna, will appear.On that day,
arouse devotion towards me;At best, look at the natural state during your generation and
perfection practices;Establish the outer, inner and secret practicesWith the excellent motivation
of bodhicitta;Make vast aspirations to create the karmic connectionTo become a guide
for the beings of the six realms.Other than this, purify the obscurations of body, speech
and mindAnd strive in accumulating positive karma.Help by propagating the Buddha’s teachings
and by building objects of worship.Take the one-day lay vows, make tsa-tsas,Set living
creatures free, and recite ransom prayers.Build bridges for people to cross dangerous
paths safely.Make offerings to the saṅgha, make circumambulations,And pray to me with devotion.With
whatever virtue you are personally drawn to, pray to me with devotion!At the least,
at sun rise on the tenth dayDo not engage in non-virtuous deeds, such as taking lives.Give
whatever you can to the disabled, to beggars, dogs and animals—All those around your
home—and cultivate compassion.In brief, on the tenth day of the waxing moon,Whoever you are,
wherever you may be,Make offerings to the Buddha and assist sentient beings,Reverently
write out mantra syllables,Or with compassion prepare and offer water bowls,Perform activities
such as these on the Lotus-Born’s day!On that day, because of my former aspirations,Any
merit will be multiplied a hundred thousand timesAnd my compassion will swiftly protect
you.My heart disciples—If you wish for peace and happiness to come to Tibet,Establish the
excellent law of Dharma as the law of the land.Through my example and liberation, you will
be cared for—Whichever of the outer, inner and secret sādhanas you practiceFor accomplishing
the sūtras, tantras, teachings and pith-instructions,Leaving nothing out, and nothing
added or misspelled.If you follow this advice, you can rest in certainty—Have no doubt that
peace and happiness will come to Tibet!

The great Fifth Dalai Lama’s prayer, Cloud-banks of Blessings, recounts the deeds of the Guru:

During all activities—practices, offerings, prayers and praises,If your wisdom-being is invoked
with unshakable devotion,Then at sunrise on the excellent tenth day you will come!This
is your vajra-speech and your promise!

From The Secret Guide to Accomplishing the Guru:[30]

When you clearly meditateIn the generation stageOf any sādhana whatsoever—There I am before
you.When you make the maṇḍalaAnd set out tormas and the substances of offering,Do not doubt
it—I will come to you.I shall come, unable to resist,When with devotion and strong, fervent
prayersYou pray to me, the Lotus-Born of Uḍḍiyāna.I will come to you.

And:

Meditate on me, the Guru; accomplish me; follow me.For seeing me is seeing all the buddhas.And,
because I am the very essence of all the sugatas,On every tenth day I shall come to Tibet.


Therefore, remembering the Lotus-Born’s life and liberation, make fervent prayers.

In the Pema Kathang, the precious Guru addresses the princess:[31]

In this noble field that the Buddha tamed,An emanation of the Teacher is in front of every being.In
former ages I was Amitābha, Lord of Boundless Light,And, on Potala Hill, the Lord
Who Sees,[32]And Padmasambhava upon the Dhanakośa ocean.Only do I seem to have these three
identities,For they in truth are never separate from each other.Samantabhadra in the dharmadhātu,Great
Vajradhara in the field of Dense Adornment,The Mighty One upon the Vajra Throne—[33]All
are inseparable, by nature Padmasambhava, none other than myself.My blessings,
which bring about beings' benefit, are great and wonderful.

Ratna Lingpa’s terma The Invocation of Uḍḍiyāna on the Tenth Day[34] states:

In brief, the ways I tame are beyond imagination,For Uḍḍiyāna’s kindness is not slight, but
vast!Every realm shall have a most sacred place,That will be a monument to Uḍḍiyāna;At every
frontier there will be a treasure trove,Likewise a monument to Uḍḍiyāna.

And:[35]

And likewise it is said that the various rituals and practices for the subjugation of evil forces,
which in every village are performed by monks or lay practitioners of Secret Mantra—these
too are memorials of the master of Uḍḍiyāna.

The text goes on to say:

Briefly told, my ways of benefit are past imagining,And all shall be memorials to me, Uḍḍiyāna.In
times to come, when people yearn for meAnd think of me with longing love,Behold, I shall
be standing at their side.And all who on the tenth day of the waxing moonRecall and make
remembrance of me—They and I shall never separate...And yet for me, in truth, there is
no coming or going.You meet me when your karma and your obscurationsAre both cleansed.According
to the prayers and relative perceptionsOf the ones whom I might train,I am indeed residing
in the land of rakṣasas.And yet, because the stream of my compassion is unbroken,I
am present constantly to those with faith in me...

The great Guru of Uḍḍiyāna said:

For anyone, man or woman, who has faith in me,I, the Lotus Born, have never departed—I sleep
on their threshold.For me there is no death.An emanation of myself, the Lotus-Born,Will be
present in front of each and every one with faith in me.

The fourth chapter of The Jeweled Treasury of the Oral Transmission, discovered by Ratna Lingpa,
says the following in the advice to Yeshé Tsogyal:[36]

From time to time, go to some pleasant place, a mountaintop or some lonely valley, and pray
to me at the top of your voice—so loudly you feel as if your very head might burst. Filled
with devotion, allow a weariness of saṃsāra and a longing to be freed to flood into you until
great tears well forth. This is a crucial instruction, since it will wash away a great
many karmic obscurations.

Holding these, the Lotus-Born’s unfailing vajra-promises, in your heart, make fervent prayers!

3. Explanation of the Gaṇacakra

When we embark upon the profound path of skilful means, the Secret Mantra Vajrayāna, the special
method that swiftly brings about the two accumulations is the gaṇacakra.[37] Within the
gaṇacakra a distinction of four gatherings is made.[38] These are explained in The Stages
of Vajra Activity:[39]

When there is a gathering of friends, this is called ‘the gathering of practitioners.’ When
all the components are present, this is explained as ‘the gathering of blissful abundance.’
When the deities and oath-bound protectors are gathered, this is explained as ‘the gathering
of the great assembly.’ This ensures that the continuous perfection of the two accumulations
will be recognized as ‘the great gathering.’

Firstly, if the assembled—the gathering of practitioners—is made up of only skilful means (male)
or only wisdom (female), then the gathering is called ‘the feast of heroes’ or ‘the feast
of heroines’ respectively. If both skilful means and wisdom are in attendance, then the
gathering is called ‘the gathering of fortunate ones.’ Secondly, the gathering of components
such as food, drink, clothes, ornaments, song and dance, and union and liberation, constitutes
‘the gathering of abundant components.’ Thirdly, setting up a representation of
the wisdom maṇḍala, both deities and palace, along with its guardians and meditation upon
it as the basis of the siddhis, constitutes ‘the gathering of delighted deities.’[40] Fourth
is the continuity of the two accumulations, called ‘the great gathering.’ The gaṇacakra
of means, the applied conduct of the generation stage with appearances—all this is the accumulation
of merit. The completion stage of wisdom is the realization and familiarization
of the entire profound assemblage as unborn—this is the perfect accumulation of wisdom.

As feast substances, gather whatever you are able to acquire – in particular, the five meats
and amṛtas. This, in turn, means that meat and alcohol are indispensable feast substances.
The Heruka Galpo[41] elaborates:

Dorje tsé, galché, jamdé, datrom, jagat, tsetri, dzagé, māṃsa, trenmo, shamo, kuntugyü, amra,
günbrum, agaru, nali, gegyé, and so forth.

If we explain these secret terms, then dorjé tsé is dough[42], galché is a dough of flour mixed
with rice beer, jamdé is milk, datrom is butter and cheese, jagad is alcohol, tsetri are
bitter tasting foods, dzagé is curd and pies, māṃsa is meat, trenmo are condiments,[43]
shamo are fruits, kuntugyü is salt, amra is human flesh, günbrum is elephant meat, agaru
is horse meat, nali is cow meat, and gegyé is dog meat. In essence, gather whatever food and
drink you are able to acquire. Regarding the feast substances,[44] the great Atiśa said:

To Tibet no merit will come, because substances offered are so few!

As it is said, to offer merely as much as you can eat is inappropriate. Thus, do not thoughtlessly
set down just a single bag of food. Arrange the feast articles nicely on the hide of
a carnivorous animal, or on a cloth painted to represent this. Place them in a kāpāla or
other precious vessel. Place the food on the right of the shrine and the drinks on the left.
Sprinkle the feast substances with clean water, for purification. With raṃ, yaṃ and khaṃ,
all the habits of dualistic grasping at objects are burned, scattered and washed away,
and the faults and defects of the offered substances are cleansed. Through the three syllables
(oṃ, āḥ and hūṃ), the substances are purified and multiplied, and thereby consecrated
to become heaps of sensual delights. Next, sprinkle the feast substances with amṛta. When
you sprinkle the substances with scented water, imagine that from the scented water the
gathering of wrathful ones emanates and expels all the obstacle makers. Moreover, with light
radiating forth from yourself as the deity, imagine that all the sensual delights of all
the world(s) are gathered up, dissolving into the feast substances. It is said that this
is a key point.

Do not place as feast substances articles that are impure, improper or obtained through wrong
livelihood and the like. Know what to adopt and what to abandon, and thus avoid mistakes
such as eating before the feast has been offered, diminishing the remainder, and ‘feast-wolf
behaviour’.[45] The assembled pure samaya holders—the vajra-brothers and sisters—should
refrain from disrespectful behaviours such as joking, chatting and inattentiveness. Maintain
‘yogic conduct of awareness’, do a full or symbolic prostration,[46] and take your seat.


Then, imagine the whole assembly of the deities of the maṇḍala, together with the deities of
the Three Roots, and the protectors, invited as guests from the buddha-fields of the ten
directions, taking their seats in the sky in front, gathering like billowing clouds. It is
explained in the Heruka Galpo:

First, offer the six sensual delights.Second, make confession with the samaya substances, amṛta.Third,
serve the aggregates of enemies and obstacle makers.

As stated, the feast-offering is divided into three portions. Elsewhere in the scriptures, the
feast-offering is described as divided into four or five portions. Whatever scripture you
follow, when you offer the first portion, visualize goddesses of sensual delights filling
the whole of the sky and presenting cloud-banks of offerings in unimaginable array to the
whole assembly of deities. And, as the assembled deities take delight in these offerings,
imagine that the two accumulations are perfected.

For the second portion, the confession, imagine the samaya substances, such as the five meats
and amṛtas, to be in essence the nature of wisdom amṛta. Delighting in the offered substances,
the deities are filled with love. As all defilements and breakages are confessed in
their presence, all corruptions and degenerations of samaya, every deterioration, without
exception, is purified. Thus, impairments[47] in relation to the wisdom deities are restored.

For the third portion, the liberation offering, perform the liberation of the self through actualizing
the view, the fortress of dharmatā; the meditation, the clearance of the pitfalls
of samādhi; and the action, the life-force of compassion.[48] It is explained in the tantras:

The great samaya of liberation through compassionIs neither killing [out of anger] nor suppressing
[out of ignorance].My whole body is transformed into vajra-bodyAnd my consciousness
is transformed into vajra, [its true nature].[49]

As stated, the person performing the liberation ritual should be a holder of all the profound
key-points of realization and conduct:

being entirely motivated by great bodhicitta,having the capacity to liberate others through
compassion[50]being stable, powerful and focused[51]performing the three clear visualizations[52]holding
the samādhi of the three [satisfactions][53]enacting the three supports of
life, cleansing and place[54]

Such a person then liberates his enemies, those wicked evildoers who have committed the seven
violations[55] and who thereby show all ten grounds.[56] He liberates them through profound
methods of fierce and wrathful subjugation. Once liberated, their consciousness is sent
to the Akaniṣṭha heaven, by means of entering the place of union of the Victorious Lord
and Lady. Then such beings take rebirth as sons and daughters of the awakened family. This
is what is called ‘caring for others’ through the skilful means of Secret Mantra. Since sharing
the full meaning of this would make the text too complex, I shall not elaborate further.

In the case of a simple feast-offering, the procedure for the third portion is as follows. Having
summoned the enemies and obstacle makers and having bound, shackled and intoxicated
them, imagine that the wrathful deities who ‘send the consciousness’ enjoy the third portion
as the samaya of ‘vajra food’. Thus sprinkle it with amṛta, and offer the third portion.


The first, confession and liberation portions are blessed with amṛta and then offered to the
torma. If this is inconvenient, you can also ‘symbolically offer the portions‘[57] and arrange
them in order, in front of you, as best you can. There are various traditions for ‘offering
the fulfilment’[58] and, as is often done, it is acceptable for this to follow on
from the liberation offering. Sprinkle the fulfilment offering with amṛta, visualize the general
guests such as the protectors of the pure abodes, and present the fulfilment offering
in a clean place outside. It is said that any of the infinite activities—such as giving
empowerments, or consecration (rabné) or fire-offering (jinsek) rituals—can be inserted at
this point.

Next, the ritual assistant puts a feast portion aside. Having paid homage, and with arms crossed,[59]
he says, “Please enjoy this feast offering!” and so forth.[60] With this, he or
she offers the feast to the vajra-master. In turn, the vajra-master performs the lotus mudrā
and takes the feast with the three-pointed mudrā. The ritual assistant(s) then distribute(s)
the feast to the entire assembly, starting from the beginning of the rows. The vajra-master
and students set aside mindless behaviour and maintain the three maṇḍalas,[61] reciting
together: “The aggregates, elements and sense organs of my body... .”[62] Visualize
the deities of the maṇḍala of the hundred deities,[63] the sacred essence of the three seats
of completeness of the aggregates, elements and sense fields.[64] Bring to mind the recollection
of purity of the vajra-body. Recognizing the five fingers of your hands to be the
five goddesses of sensual delights, take hold of the food and drink, visualizing it either
as the amṛta of bliss and emptiness (according to the path of method) or as untainted wisdom
amṛta (according to the path of liberation) offer the feast so that it fulfils the six
satisfactions[65] and delight in and enjoying the offerings. Then recite aspiration prayers,
such as: “By making this feast offering, to the city of Glorious Herukas...”[66] As
for the samaya substances of the feast, do not despise or look down on them, merely accepting
some and rejecting others. Avoid the eight infractions[67] such as quarrelling, making
noises, or joking.

The points of the six satisfactions, as given by Jikme Lingpa, are:

to satisfy the deities of the field of accumulation, with offerings,to satisfy the yogins, with
vajra-foods and drinks,to satisfy the wisdom maṇḍala, with the essence of amṛta,to satisfy
the deities of the body maṇḍala, with the wisdom of bliss and emptiness,to satisfy the
outer and inner ḍākinīs, with song,to satisfy the haughty spirits and their retinues, with
the torma.

While remaining untainted by hope and fear, by thoughts of clinging to pure and impure, bring
to mind that all appearance and existence is the display of infinite purity, and has always
been so—throughout beginningless time. Thus take the feast-offerings of the sensual delights
as siddhis, and enjoy them. Visualize your aggregates, elements and sense organs as
the male and female deities, and satisfy them with the white and red amṛta of the essences
of the channels. Imagine the delight of the entire gathering of deities of the maṇḍala of
the body. This then constitutes the outer gaṇacakra of sensual delights. Imagine all the
yogins and yoginīs to be in nature the iṣṭadevatās, ḍākinīs, vīras, and vīrās. Then, by means
of the blessing of the secret space, and the descending and ascending energy of union,
ascertain the wisdom of the four joys. This constitutes the inner gaṇacakra. The secret
gaṇacakra is to rest, without altering or fabricating, within the essence of the self-abiding
natural state, the sphere of primordial wisdom of great bliss, free from all elaborations.

If you wish to perform vajra songs and dance, The Garland of Pearls has this to say:[68]

For the gaṇacakra, receiving empowerments and entering the maṇḍala,Diligently perform and offer
songs!

As stated, while applying yourself to the ocean of realization and conduct of the inconceivable
dharmatā, diligently engage in vajra songs and dance! The excellent benefits of vajra
song and dance are described in The Union of the Sun and Moon:[69]

The immaculate vajra songSatisfies the minds of all the buddhas,Aids the experience of the yogins,Captivates
the minds of the ḍākinīs,Averts cravings for saṃsāra in the six classes of
beings.

Like this, the tantra speaks of the benefits extensively.

Next, the whole assembly, with no trace of stinginess, gives leftover food – which is collected,
beginning from the ends of the rows. During an accomplishment practice,[70] this leftover
food, the remainder, is kept ‘imprisoned’ for the duration of the practice. Then, for
the accomplishment of ‘swift activity,’ the remainder is placed at the north-eastern border
of the maṇḍala. As stated in the Heruka Galpo:

Within the maṇḍala of the remainder at the north-eastern border,Draw with rakta E’s or crescents
upon a violator’s skin.

Similarly, in the maṇḍalas in the north-east and south-west, draw for the peaceful activities
a circular maṇḍala with scented water, and for the wrathful activities, upon a violator’s
skin[71], a dharmodaya, source of phenomena,[72] and a crescent. During a one-day practice,
the pure and impure remainder are placed one above the other[73] and then blessed and
consecrated. The pure remainder is offered to the seven higher ranks, while the impure remainder
from the yogins is offered to the seven lower ranks. Visualize within the infinite
dark-blue triangle at the periphery, the remainder maṇḍala—a palace with doors, the gathering
of peaceful and wrathful deities, the sacred lands and places, the guests of the seven
higher ranks and the seven lower ranks—such as the ḍākinīs, kiṃkaras, and rākṣasas. By whistling,
you call and invite them. Thus, imagine that they come and gather within the triangle
at the periphery, like crows landing on a plain, and recite:[74]

“First, offer the best portion.”[75]

Since the best portion belongs to the gathering of peaceful and wrathful deities, it is to be
offered to the guests of the seven higher ranks, first.

“Second, enjoy the two inseparable as one.”

The assembly of mātṛkās and ḍākinīs enjoy it with them.[76]

“Third, satisfy the guests with the remainder.”

Next, offer the remainder to its respective owners—the guests of the seven lower ranks, such
as the ḍākinīs, kiṃkaras and rākṣasas. For this:

“Bless the remainder with spit.”[77]

By this means, the samaya with the respectful owners of the remainder, such as the ḍākinīs,
kiṃkaras and rākṣasas is mixed as one.[78]

“Thus there is a division into three parts.”

Similar to the way things work in the mundane world, there is a great difference between the
lord and the subjects.[79]

“Finally, mix it inseparable as one.”

For the peaceful, enriching or magnetising activity, place it below. For wrathful activity,
place it on top.[80]

Dedicate the practice according to the tradition of our sacred forefathers. At night and in
order to protect from a ‘direct encounter’,[81] place a burning lamp in the remainder. The
ritual assistant wearing the ceremonial hat goes outside and carries the remainder seventy
steps away from the shrine room. This is called the ‘feeding pathway of the rakṣasas.’ There,
the ritual assistant places the remainder on an offering plate.

Beings of the seven higher ranks, according to the Heruka Galpo:

1) those called-upon from all-encompassing space2) those who hold authentic blessings3) the
great method revealed as male4) the great wisdom revealed as female5) the eight wrathful gaurīs6)
the great piśacīs of the lands7) the four female wisdom gate-keepers

These constitute the maṇḍala of those of the seven higher ranks.

Beings of the seven lower ranks:

1) The thirty-two magical ḍākinīs,2) The eight great kiṃkaras who delight in union and liberation3)
The three rākṣasas who offer the extent of their realization4) The eight jvālas who
inflict harm on body, speech and mind5) The māras, the rākṣasas, the seven mātṛkās and the
four bhaginīs6) The sixty-four dūtīs of the sacred places

These are the six that own the impure remainder.

7) The twenty-eight who own both the pure and impure remainder.

On special occasions, when you wish to accumulate a hundred feast-offerings, after completing
the elaborate gaṇacakra sādhana liturgy, you should repeat the section that begins with
the blessing and continue until concluding with the remainder. One recitation of this part
is counted as one accumulation. According to the Mindroling tradition, a symbolic offering
is made to the vajra-master after each accumulation, and a part of this offering to him
is also symbolically dedicated as the remainder. Finally, after the ritual has been completed,
the guests of the feast simultaneously depart or dissolve.

4. Teaching the Excellent Benefits of Offering the Gaṇacakra

The Vajra-Net states:

Amongst the accumulations of merit, the gaṇacakra is supreme.All wishes of this life will be
accomplished,Negative forces and obstacles will be pacified.In the next, in the realm of
the victorious vidyādharas,One will reach the level of Samantabhadra.

As it is said:[82]

The faults of the transgressions of samaya will be dispelled.Everything unfavourable will be
defeated.One will accomplish whatever one desires.One will gather and accumulate virtue.All
the food of the feast will bestow siddhis.The deities and spirits of the remainder will
be satisfied.Performing the ritual of the gaṇacakraWill swiftly grant the siddhi of mahāmudrā
– its prophecy and attainment.

In essence, therefore, practitioners will by this means perfect the two accumulations and restore
all impairments and breakages of samaya. Thus does one join the ranks of the herukas.


Yeshé Tsogyal said:

By gathering the gaṇacakraAnd through merely a single gaṇacakra,The lower realms will be closed
to youAnd you will never again return and take birth as a human.Understand that this is
certainly proven!

Again, Yeshé Tsogyal said:

On the tenth day of the waxing moon and the tenth day of its waning,On the eight day and the
fifteenth,[83]Gather the gaṇacakra and make offerings.Offering the gaṇacakra merely once
will close the doors to the lower realms,And you will never return and take birth as a human
again.Understand that this can be established with certainty, through logic.

The victorious Longchen Rabjam said:[84]

Amongst all conditioned virtue, there is no merit greater than gathering the profound gaṇacakra.Its
excellent benefits are as follows:It perfects the accumulations of merit and wisdom.It
restores all transgressions of samaya.Assemblies of ḍākas and ḍākinīs will gather in
the places of the practitioners and will accomplish the activities.The masters and the gathering
of the deities of the maṇḍala will be delighted.The ocean of samaya-bound guardians
will guard and protect you.Your present life will be long, free from disease.You will enjoy
renown and numerous enjoyments and helpers.Whatever you wish for will be effortlessly and
instantly accomplished.The supreme and ordinary siddhis will be attained.All obstacles
and negativities will be purifiedAnd in a future life you will gain unsurpassable awakening.Like
this, you will attain inconceivable and unutterable qualities!

Yeshé Tsogyal said:

On the tenth day of the waxing moon and the tenth day of its waning (the twenty-fifth day of
the lunar month),If you pray with fervent devotion from the depths of your heartTo Orgyen
Tsokyé Dorje, the Lake-born Vajra of Uḍḍiyāna,With his retinue of ḍākas and ḍākinīs,And if
you generate bodhicitta—Vast heart of the awakened mind for the benefit of beings,If you
strive in offering the gaṇacakra wherever you may be—In whatever land, place, great sacred
site, monastery, or city—You will reap benefits and results defying the imagination.In all
lands and all places, crime will be averted, as will famine, war, evil, and unfavourable
circumstances.Rain will fall on time, harvests will be abundant, and auspiciousness will
prevail throughout the land.If you offer the gaṇacakra every month without interruption,
the obstacles to your life will be pacified and whatever you wish for will be spontaneously
fulfilled.Material possessions, food and wealth will effortlessly come to you.If you offer
the gaṇacakra a hundred or a thousand times, you will take rebirth as a king with the power
to transform the entire world.If you offer the gaṇacakra ten thousand or a hundred thousand
times, you will become a universal monarch with dominion over multiple world systems.If
you offer the gaṇacakra a million times, you will bring the three realms under your control;
your glory and splendor will outshine the three plains of existence; you will accomplish
without difficulty the four activities; and in your next life you will take rebirth
in the buddhafield of Lotus Light, amidst vidyādharas and ḍākinīs, where you will receive
the nectar-like speech of Guru Rinpoche. Thus blessed, you will be able to benefit beings
in infinite ways.

It is also said:

Whoever strives in practicing the gaṇacakraWill reach, in the future, the pure stages of the
vidyādharasIn the realm of Lotus Light.There is no doubt – they will not return to saṃsāra!


The Guru’s Jewel Ocean by Pema Lingpa[85] states:

If we link the excellent benefits of practicing on the tenth day to the supreme siddhis of the
four vidyādhara stages, then:Offering a gaṇacakra on the tenth day of the tiger month will
lead you to attain the mahāmudrā vidyādhara;Offering a gaṇacakra on the tenth day of the
snake month will lead you to attain the vidyādhara with power over life;Offering a gaṇacakra
on the tenth day of the monkey month will lead you to attain the spontaneously accomplished
vidyādhara;Offering a gaṇacakra on the tenth day of the pig month will lead you to
attain the matured vidyādhara.Or, if we link the excellent benefits to the ordinary siddhis
of the accomplishment of the four activities, then:Offering a gaṇacakra on the tenth day
of the rabbit month will lead you to accomplish the pacifying activity;Offering a gaṇacakra
on the tenth day of the horse month will lead you to accomplish the enriching activity;Offering
a gaṇacakra on the tenth day of the bird month will lead you to accomplish the magnetizing
activity;Offering a gaṇacakra on the tenth day of the rat month will lead you to
accomplish the subjugating activity;Offering a gaṇacakra on the tenth day of the dragon
month, will mean all illnesses, negative forces and obstacles will be pacified;Offering a
gaṇacakra on the tenth day of the sheep month will mean life-span and merit will increase,
and wealth and enjoyments abound;Offering a gaṇacakra on the tenth day of the dog month will
mean whatever you wish for will effortlessly come to be;Offering a gaṇacakra on the tenth
day of the ox month will mean all harm from unfavourable circumstances, enemies and obstacles
will be pacified.

The same benefits apply to the tenth day of the waning moon (the twenty-fifth day) of every
month. The blessing that comes with gathering the gaṇacakra on every tenth and twenty-fifth
day of every month will purify, without exception, all negativity and evil accumulated with
body, speech and mind, and will guarantee that we become, in future lives, a buddha. Inconceivable
and unutterable benefits such as these will be ours.

Thus it is perfectly logical that we—followers of the embodiment of all the victorious ones,
the second buddha, the great master from Uḍḍiyāna, the Mahāguru Padmākara—and all holders
of the Ngagyur Nyingma tradition, and each and every being of all classes and families having
faith and devotion put effort into making offerings, wherever we are on the tenth day.


This text, A Bouquet of Uḍumbara Flowers: An Explanation of the Significance of the Tenth Day
and its Practice, was requested by my American students. Thus I, Rigdzin Trinlé Özer, often
called the vidyā-mantra holder Gönpo Tseten, wrote it at the Yeshé Nyingpo Dharma centre
in the area of California in America. Through it, may the minds of all sentient beings
enter the virtuous path, and may excellent virtue increase ever further – like the waxing
moon.Virtue! Virtue! Virtue!Sarva-maṅgalaṃ!The artist from Dolpo, Pema Wangyal, served as
a scribe. May everything be virtuous and auspicious!

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2018. (Translated by Stefan Mang. Many thanks to Drokpa Tulku,
Khenpo Pema Namgyal, Lama Rigdzin Zangpo, Kaleb Yaniger and Han Kop for kindly providing
suggestions and clarifications. Edited by Libby Hogg.)